# RSMF Whole Team Meeting

Date: Tuesday 21 April 2026

Present: Heather Turner, Ella Kaye,Peter Dalgaard,Mossa Merhi Reimert.Luke Tierney, Gergely Daroczi, Kevin Ushey, Gabe Becker, Kylie Bemis, Jeroen Ooms


Apologies: Mikael Jagan

> [!NOTE]  
> This meeting will be recorded and shared with invitees that cannot attend.

## Agenda

0. Michael Lawrence would like to be added to meeting invites

1. Project admin update

 * Contracts
   * Main agreement between University of Birmingham (lead institution) and University of Edinburgh (handling the RSMF fund) is still under review but expect to be signed soon.
   * Started process to create contracts between University of Birmingham all project co-leads, sub-contractors and partners. Some will probably be easier to sort out than others - hopefully get at least some in place over next month.
 * R Consortium support
   * LF Crowdfunding fund approved (https://crowdfunding.lfx.linuxfoundation.org/initiative/da1ec48d-f041-43c3-82dc-5a20f4b7036b), so we have the option to use this to manage travel funding.
   * RC have provided a sponsorship contract for the R Project Sprint which HT has passed on to grant managers to review - not sure yet if we can manage the funds this way, but at least we have basis for discussion.
 * Outputs Management Plan (https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/blob/main/docs/outputs_management_plan.qmd) 
     * Required by funders within first month of grant start. Do have option to update. Please review and let HT know any suggested updates.
     * Responsible AI: human in the loop, test and understand any contributed code
     * Environmental impact of AI, automated testing, other heavy computation
         > Team members will be asked to record activities with heavy computational cost, so that we can consider both the value of these activities and how the cost may be minimised.
         - Impact of flying mught outweight computational activities
         - Some activities (e.g. flying, CRAN testing) may be relatively high cost, but essential to the project, so justified.
         - Focus should be considering environment impact when planning our approach to activities, judging relative environmental impact of activities rather than attempting to measure impact, which will be difficult
         - Suggested update: "Projects with a potentially high and ongoing computational cost will analyze the environment impact..." ?
         - For now: consider if any project you are working on is likely to require heavy computation - flag that up in reporting.

2. Mentored Cohort updates

* Gabe Becker (Michael Lawrence)
  - Met with Michael a week or so ago
  - Started on bug triage, some posts waiting for external feedback, e.g. proposed solution
    - Discussing ideas in triage-team channel on Slack
    - Using Your Bugs in Bugzilla to see what commented on
  - Best approach to pinging for feedback?
    - Do need to ping if no response after a few weeks
    - Potentially highlight in RSMF Whole Team Meeting if there are particular bugs where the lack of response is holding you up, e.g. you need feedback on a proposed solution before you can work on it.
    - Other cases where waiting on a response:
      - suspected wontfix
      - possible quick fixes
    - May be better to collaborate e.g. on etherpad on a list of bugs waiting for feedback (categorised by type, e.g. "suspected wontfix")
    - May be a new status like CONFIRMED that R Core could use to filter bugs waiting for feedback?
      - SU enabled a TRIAGED status during the meeting so we can try this out and see what happens

* Kylie Bemis (Peter Dalgaard)

    - Met with Peter a few weeks ago to discuss project ideas
      - documenting C API: reasons for what is public vs not;
      - issues related to S4 generic functions; big objects "accidentally" captured in closures
    - Busy next couple of weeks until end semester

* Mikael Jagan (Paul Murrell) - sends apologies
  
* Jeroen Ooms (Luke Tierney)

    - Worked with Kurt on extra checks for CRAN packages that fail on Linux ARM but not macOS ARM. Want to run same check for incoming submissions.
    - Would like to get binary packages for ARM on Windows to work, unclear how to move forward on this. SU: problem is there is a lot of refactoring that needs doing as currently a lot of package code assumes Windows x86.
    - Would like to start working on checks for ARM on Windows, probably using GitHub runners. Will need binary packages for Windows to work on ARM first.

* Kevin Ushey (Simon Urbanek)

    - Using fuzzer with R to see what breaks. Identifying edge cases that are worth fixing.
    - One more interesting caseL out-of-bounds reads in the TRE regular expression engine.
      - R Core has been maintaining TRE code used by R. What is the best way to propose changes to TRE - if issues are opened on TRE bug tracker, will the changes make it into R?
      - SU: This was something planned to look at under the Sovereign Tech Fund, i.e. pushing/pulling upstream changes, or even replacing TRE as not as widely used as PCRE. 
    - So far work has been done on local desktop. May be worthwhile to run periodic checks
      - Google has OSS fuzz infrastructure for fuzzing lots of open source software. We could make a proposal to add something there. SU: Sounds useful. HT: May be good idea to draft proposal to share with R Core.


* Mossa Reimert (Peter Dalgaard)

    - Looking into R build and how it might be simplified.
    - Current experimentation involved many overlapping changes so not easy to share, but for example removing libtool, which is unused, appears to reduce build time.
    - Need to reduce to minimal reproducible examples and document so people can review suggested changes

* Michael Chirico (Simon Urbanek)
    - Started looking at Analyses bugs, often require specific advanced statistical knowledge, so takes some time to understand
    - Working on document proposing 64-bit integers for R, plans to look at a minimal patch to get a sense of how big such a change would be
    - Met with Fernando Corrêa to talk about him getting involved with Weblate admin
 
3. Bug triage (discussed indirectly during GB's update)

* Permissions on Bugzilla - triagers currently have
  * canconfirm: mark a bug as confirmed or duplicate
  * bz_canusewhines: allows triagers to configure queries and schedules for periodic reports to be run and sent via email to themselves. 
  * editbugs permission needs further discussion with R Core on agreed use as allows to edit all fields
 
4. Translation work (Gergely Daróczi/Fernando Corrêa)

- Cleanup of locked components
- Other housekeeping tasks: fix translation errors (such as malformed "%s" or similar obvious typos), remove duplicated entries, standardize line length
- Patch file generated with related tooling:

| Language  | New      | Updated  | Files   |
|-----------|----------|----------|---------|
| es        | 2462     | 1284     | 20      |
| pl        | 417      | 821      | 24      |
| pt_BR     | 387      | 315      | 23      |
| fr        | 151      | 373      | 22      |
| ar        | 276      | 34       | 16      |
| ne        | 276      | 7        | 4       |
| tr        | 122      | 29       | 5       |
| ca        | 27       | 113      | 15      |
| de        | 2        | 138      | 13      |
| ja        | 46       | 68       | 21      |
| zh_CN     | 19       | 82       | 16      |
| hi        | 85       | 3        | 10      |
| ru        | 11       | 68       | 7       |
| en_GB     | 22       | 46       | 13      |
| ko        | 5        | 27       | 15      |
| hu        | 28       | 0        | 10      |
| it        | 4        | 21       | 6       |
| id        | 24       | 0        | 13      |
| da        | 5        | 5        | 17      |
| lt        | 5        | 5        | 23      |
| nl        | 10       | 0        | 10      |
| zh_TW     | 7        | 3        | 6       |
| nn        | 2        | 1        | 1       |
| cs        | 3        | 0        | 3       |
| fa        | 0        | 1        | 2       |
| sq        | 1        | 0        | 1       |
| **TOTAL** | **4397** | **3444** | **317** |

- Patch has been posted on Slack - will email to Micheal Lawrence to hopefully get merged into R.
- Created some helper scripts that should make preparing patch easier in future.
- Helping Fernando get on-boarded so he can SSH to the server and help prepare patches in future.

5. Governance/outreach updates

* R Contributor/R project Zulip (https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/issues/25) - Ella Kaye

    * Issue links to notes - https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/blob/main/notes/zulip.md
    * Aiming for a proposal by next month (notes as they stand are a bit of a brain-dump with questions/comments I've had as researching)
    * Please comment on the issue!

* R Dev Days/R Project Sprint - Heather Turner

  * Events with open registration - please register if coming (in person/online):
    * Rencontres R, Nantes/Remote, June 19: https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-rr2026/
    * CascadiaR, Portland/Remote, June 26: https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-cascadiar-2026
  * Events with open application - either apply or let HT know you plan to come
    * useR!, Warsaw, July 10: https://user2026.r-project.org/additional/r-dev-day.html
    * R Project Sprint, Sep 1-3: https://contributor.r-project.org/r-project-sprint-2026/
    * Tracking RSMF participants on issues, e.g. https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/issues/45

## Upcoming Dates

* ** 18 May 20:30 RSMF Whole Team Meeting **
* 23 April 15:00 UTC [R Repositories Working Group](https://r-consortium.org/news/cal.html)
* 28 April 19:30 UTC [R Contribution Working Group](https://contributor.r-project.org/events/)
* 12 May 08:00 UTC [EMEA/APAC R Contributor Office Hour](https://contributor.r-project.org/events/)
* 12 May 16:00 UTC [AMER R Contributor Office Hour](https://contributor.r-project.org/events/)

