# RSMF Whole Team Meeting

Date: Tuesday 17 March 2026

Present: Heather Turner, Ella Kaye, Hadley Wickham, Kevin Ushey, Kylie Bemis, Noam Ross, Peter Dalgaard, Michael Lawrence, Gabe Becker, Simon Urbanek

Apologies: Paul Murrell, Deepayan Sarkar, Mossa Reimert, Jeroen Ooms

## Agenda

1. Project admin update

    - Contracts

        - Main agreement is with Birmingham (Bham) to be signed. Should be with post-award team in a couple of days, then individual contracts will be arranged.

        - Some folks might start informally now, others may prefer to wait until contract is in place

   - Travel fund. Applied for Linux Foundation crowdfunding fund so we can reimburse individuals directly (or award travel bursaries if reimbursement not viable). Pending approval: https://crowdfunding.lfx.linuxfoundation.org/initiative/da1ec48d-f041-43c3-82dc-5a20f4b7036b
   Linux Foundation not charging a fee

       - TODO: HT to follow up with Terry, who should have draft contract for review next week.
 
   - Meeting schedule for Q1 & Q2

       - RSMF Whole Team 3rd Monday of month 7:30pm UTC. Make this if you can. Invites from h.l.turner@bham.ac.uk
  
            - Can we move April one to 3rd Tuesday (21 April) UTC as HT and EK have an all-day event that day? No objections

            - TODO: HT will send updated invite
         
       - Office Hours 2nd Tuesday of month, 8am / 4pm UTC (EMEA-APAC/AMER). Open to all contributors to provide/receive mentoring. Can be used to catch up on RSMF projects (in break out room if necessary). Invites via RCWG (rowforwards@gmail.com)
            - Could be a useful time for mentor-mentee meetings (can form break-out rooms)

       - R Contribution Working Group alternates 4th Tuesday 7:30pm UTC (even month) / 4th Thursday 2:30pm UTC (odd month). To discuss outreach events, governance issues. Invites via RCWG. 

       - R Repositories Working Group: various but doesn't clash, see https://r-consortium.org/news/cal.html.

       - Assumed: R Foundation 2nd Wednesday/Thursday UTC.

        - Do we want to do a 6monthly/yearly report-out, perhaps recorded webinars to share work with the wider community?

            - Semi-annual statements to the community would be highly appreciated and would create further support.
            
            - R Consortium can help with webinars, e.g. sharing webinar on their YouTube and promoting.

            - Good to record live so that there could be some discussion

        - It is part of the plan to write posts for the R Blog as we go along, which has some advantage of people being able to catch up async.

        - Could also write R Journal article at the end. Work accomplished, lessons learned and plan moving forwards.

        - Maybe combine some of the above with reporting requirements from funder. We are required to make quarterly reports, not sure what form is expected yet.

            - "Quarter" here is in the context of the project duration from 1 March, so Q1 is March - May 2026, etc.

   - Data management plan (HT working on this)

   - Invitations to R-devel GitHub organisation (so you can be added to the project team: https://github.com/orgs/r-devel/teams/rsmf-project-team, assigned to issues, etc). Please accept!
   
3. Mentored cohort getting started
   
    - Mentees have been asked to create Q1 workplans and arrange meeting with mentors to discuss
    
    - Current status:

        - Gabe Becker (Michael Lawrence) - meeting on Thursday. Wants to wrap up spell-check work that started at Warwick visit. Then work on install.packages + bugs. 

        - Kylie Bemis  (Peter Dalgaard) - initial meeting still needs to be scheduled. Interested in working on C API, ALTREP, memory management.

        - Mikael Jagan (Paul Murrell) - not yet had a meeting yet with Paul. Expressed interest in 4 issues, so will need to choose one to focus on.

        - Jeroen Ooms (Luke Tierney) - neither present.

        - Kevin Ushey  (Simon Urbanek) - synced up with Simon, will look at fuzzing.

        - Mossa Reimert (Peter Dalgaard) - Peter hasn't heard from Mossa

        - Michael Chirico (Simon Urbanek) - met with Simon. Short term focus on bugs + translation infrastructure. Long-term proposal for 64-bit integers (Kylie and Gabe would also be interested in this). Michael Lawerence suggests connecting with Robert Gentleman about this. Has been previous discussion about this in R Core. It's a hard problem. What are the use cases?
   
        - Note that issues on the rsmf GitHub are just ideas to begin with. HT assigned anyone that expressed an interest or supported the idea. Part of prioritizing what to work on should be identifying who wants to actively engage on the project - should revise assignee list as part of moving an issues from "Ideas" to "To Do". For a mentee interested in lots of issues, they can discuss with mentor about which is most useful to R Core. Can also consider who else is working on each issue (multiplier effect if there's more than one mentee on a project).
   
        - New ideas should be added as new issues (will automatically be put into "Ideas" on the project board)
          
        - TODO: HT will follow up with mentees/mentors not present.
   
3. GitHub repo: https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/
 
    -  rsmf GitHub repo will be used to track work on the project, in particular via the project board: https://github.com/orgs/r-devel/projects/9

        - Backlog categories issues as Ideas/To Do/In Progress

        - Adding a start date and end date to issues will put them on the Roadmap (POST-EDIT: View now saved to show issues with a start date, clear filter to see all issues).

        - Bug Triage tab can be used to track RSMF contribution: see next.

4. Specific projects
   
    -  Bug triage
    
        - Assignments: will be added to sub-issues of main bug triage issue - one for each component. TODO: mentees to check okay with their assigments.

        - Overall RSMF goal: bring >400 issues current. Year 1: Mentees to review old issues in their assigned component(s).

            - What does it mean to bring current? A bug can go through several stages: e.g. confirmed, closed as fixed, analysis done, patch proposed. In terms of counting for RSMF, should count any notable update to the bug report that brings it closer to be fixed/closed.

        - Permissions for triage team:

            - canconfirm: Can confirm a bug or mark it a duplicate

            - editbugs: Can edit all bug fields (in particular change the bug status to CLOSED).

            - Maybe editkeywords: Can create, destroy, and edit keywords

                - GOOD-FIRST-ISSUE (vs HELPWANTED which often requires deep work/special expertise)

                - Maybe RDEVDAY
        
            - TODO: HT will update permission for people on the Triage Team.

        - Can we enable "Whiteboard" field, that could be used by triagers to share information about a bug, e.g. "earmarked for R Dev Day", "reviewed by Gabe 2026-01-14", "assigned to ad-hoc contributor 2026-02-03", etc.

            - TODO: SU will work out how to add enable this.

        - Mikael: do you want to change your email on Bugzilla from McMaster one? (Yes, to my Gmail. I can do this myself today.)

    -  Translation patch for R 4.6.0: no one from translation infrastructure team present to discuss

  
5. AOB
    The following items were on the agenda but we did not have time to discuss:

    - Public C API documentation [#11](https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/issues/11) 

        - Ivan Krylov started work on R API documentation with Erez Shomron in 2024: https://aitap.codeberg.page/R-api/ - is this something we would want to incorporate or do we want to do something separate?


    - R Dev Days

        - R Dev Day @ Rencontres R 2026, Nantes + Remote, Jun 19: https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-rr2026/

            - register by 29 May

            - Heather there in person, as well as Lionel Henry and Christophe Dervieux

        - R Dev Day @ CascadiaR, Portland + Remote, Jun 26: https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-cascadiar-2026/

            - Kylie there in person

            - Looking for in-person faciliator with experience of R Dev Days

        - R Dev Day @ useR! 2026, Warsaw, Poland, 10 July

            - Application form and website being set up

            - Need some help reviewing applications (timeline to be firmed up)

        - R Project Sprint 2026, Birmingham, UK, Wed 2 - Fri 4 September (R Core meeting Tue 1 September)

            - Trying to get quotes for venue and accommodation

            - Will again need some help reviewing applications

ACTIONS

    - HT:
        - Follow up with Terry re R Consortium funding
        - Send updated invite for April
        - Follow up with mentees/mentors not present.
        - Update permissions on Bugzilla for people on the Triage Team.
        - Add ssignments to bug sub-issues

    - SU:
        - Enable whiteboard field on Bugzilla

    - Mentees:
        - Check okay with assignments to bug components
        - Meet with mentors and firm up plans for Q1 if not already done so
        - Update issues on rsmf GitHub: move issues to To Do/In Progress, add start and end date
