# RSMF /R Core /Triagers Meeting useR! 2026

Date: Thursday 9 July 2026, 14:00 - 17:00 CEST  
Venue: Room 212, Faculty of Mathematics and Information Science, Warsaw University of Technology, ul. Koszykowa 75  
Zoom: https://bham-ac-uk.zoom.us/j/85781303747?pwd=aNE9dczRGonTtPUfxGBaowoJizHI8g.1&from=addon

In person: Heather Turner, Sebastian Meyer, Lluís Revilla, Peter Dalgaard, Robert Gentleman, Mikael Jagan, Luke Tierney, Ella Kaye, Martin Mächler, Simon Urbanek, Charlie Gao, Uwe Ligges (left at 16:00)  
Online: Mossa Merhi Reimert, Ivan Krylov, Hadley Wickham, Jeroen Ooms

Apologies: Gabe Becker, Gergely Daroczi

## Agenda 

* Welcome. Who's here:
  * RSMF mentees: Mikael Jagan, Mossa Merhi Reimert, Jeroen Ooms
  * Others on RSMF project: Heather Turner, Peter Dalgaard, Simon Urbanek, Ella Kaye
  * Representatives of RSMF project partners: Chalie Gao, Hadley Wickham
  * Others on triage team: Ivan Krylov, Lluís Revilla
  * Others from R Core Team: Sebastian Meyer, Robert Gentleman, Luke Tierney, Martin Mächler, Uwe Ligges

* Project agreements with co-leads/partners - briefly discussed current status
    
* Matters arising from R Core meeting

    * Moving to 64-bit integers: use cases would be helpful

        - compatibility e.g. with databases, Arrow

        - svd() of an approx. 32000x32000 matrix breaks 32-bit integers inside BLAS while computing work array size => need 64-bit BLAS => need 64-bit 'dim' attribute

        - Ask Mike Chirico for bit64 ('integer64' S3 class) use cases?

    
    * rchk - someone would ideally take it over; it is a "curated service" - i.e.false-positives have to be looked at

        - https://github.com/kalibera/rchk 
  
        - New version by Jiří Kvapil (https://github.com/kalibera/rchk/issues?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aopen+author%3Akvapca) - he is interested in continuing to improve the tool

        - Posit already provide rchk via R-Hub, but issue is curating what are real issues 

        - Possibly an application for LLM - could be RSMF project to evaluate how useful LLMs might be here
  
        - CRAN has (had?) an internal filter for rchk reports; how many packages are flagged with and without the filter?

        - Not sure yet what false positive is, maybe ~20%

        - MJ possible interested to help curate. In short term, need a couple of helpers to say what is a true or false positive.


    * Update https://www.r-project.org/bugs.html to discourage AI-only bug reports (should be human validated and ideally summarised)
      Examples of such reports: https://bugs.r-project.org/show_bug.cgi?id=19046, 19047, 19048

        - MJ will draft a couple of sentences to share with R Core for further discussion.

* Triaging guidelines: https://cryptpad.fr/doc/#/2/doc/edit/8hoNOVRXP7vMH3FF2TCm2d9e/

    - How this is working so far - picking up on backlog of triaged issues/proposed patches
    
    - Open questions

    - Mark in a comment that it is triagged

    - Monthly summary of bugs that have been triaged to share with R Core

    - Use database dump to track triaggers work (no need for a keyword)


* AI-related projects

    * Ref https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/issues/3, BioC is moving to using AI for package checks; Vince will be spear heading, we should stay in touch
    
    * Consider adding R as a target to Google's OSS-Fuzz: https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/issues/53

        - Circulate to R Core for feedback on potential targets for fuzzing on Google's infrastructure


* Other projects not yet started

* Updates/issues from Mentees

    - Jeroen asked a while back to commit a small .github config file to svn that will make our CI mirror (which is important to mentees to develop and test patches) easier to maintain. What is the objection?

    - The objection is that it is not part of the R source; needs occasional maintenance; also raises wrong expectations

    - Contributed 3rd party systems are not part of R; also the github mirror (+ codespaces etc) do work nicely for contributors, thanks to Jeroen, indeed, without its inclusion.


     - Gabe: one thing I want to put on the radar is that im in the testing stages for a patch to install.packages that will detect local packages and make a just in time repo with them then use that to install from so that it can get dependencies via the normal existing path, in contrast with the repos=NULL approach that is required now which cannot get deps. Repos=NULL will of course still work for backwards compatibility.


* Ella is working on transition from Slack to Zulip

    - We have https://r-project.zulipchat.com/ and this is now sponsored by Zulip (we get the standard plan for free)

    - Interest in how it works with e-mail

    - Work-in-progress notes here: https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/blob/main/notes/zulip.md 


* Preparing for R Project Sprint 2026

    - Would be good to have some intros from R Core as in 2023
   
    - Start soliciting ideas, but don't need to be fully worked proposals

* R Dev Days/Sprints next year
  
   - Plan an  R Dev Day  at useR! 2027 in Chile possibly July 19
   
   - R Dev Day focused on testing R: could this be done online? Potentially late March
   
       - Testing before branch is created is more helpful, e.g. end Feb/beg Mar
       
       - Maybe do async: go through R NEWS testing new features/changes
       
        - Maybe go through mailing list data a few weeks after release to find patterns of things that broke, maybe a job for an AI.
        
        - Not really interactive: maybe more of a campaign



