# RSMF Soft Launch

Date: Monday 9 February 2026

Present: Heather Turner, Hadley Wickham, Ella Kaye, Peter Dalgaard, Kylie Bemis, Beatriz Milz, Gergely Daroczi, Martin Mächler, Luke Tierney, Mikael Jagan, Michael Chirico, Fernando Corrêa, Terry Christiani, Noam Ross

Apologies: Jeroen Ooms, Deepayan Sarkar, Kevin Ushey, Simon Urbanek

> [!NOTE]  
> This meeting will be recorded and shared with invitees that cannot attend.  

## Materials

* [Video](https://us02web.zoom.us/rec/share/Z0EojD8xOJbnZVHXrLf3QxNoqMKxhgCItjXuQEfhYHjffrREMzWQYUKL_42WTrLg.sr4kbIA5hcmlnlpZ?startTime=1770669310000), passcode: @62cX#j^ (likely to be deleted after a time due to storage on Zoom cloud)
* [Slides for parts 1-3](../presentations/2026_02_09_soft_launch/2026_02_09_soft_launch.pdf)

## Agenda

1. Brief Overview of Project Aims and Roles (HT, 10 min)
2. Introductions (All, 60 min)
    * RSEs/Community Managers
    * Mentored Contributors
        * RSMF funded
        * Partner supported
        * Non-RSMF
    * R Core 
        * RSMF funded
        * Ad-hoc mentors
        * Project mentors
        * Other R Core members present
    * Contractors (Translation Infrastructure Managers)
        * Fernando Corrêa (R6)
        * Beatriz Milz (R6)
        * Gergely Daroczi (weblate management)
    * Partners
        * Posit (Hadley Wickham)
        * A2-Ai
        * R Consortium (Terry Christiani)
        * R Foundation
        * rOpenSci (Noam Ross)
3. Next steps (HT, 5 min)

    * Main contract not signed, but in progress. Birmingham University + Edinburgh + RSMF. Working through various forms. Then Birmingham can set up contracts with partners (including in kind). Hopefully in March.
    * Mentored cohort: next step is to pair mentee with mentor. Paired for 2 years, can discuss work plans, technical challenges, etc. Potentially someone who could nominate you for R core. 
    * Will post projects (currently brainstorming in [google doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1fTQP3uVqqclOQnTUmOBbjw6u3TrPZpFooI4bDrUfKKw/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.7ki5iqrh5hyl)) into GitHub issues. Projects can be long (full 2 years) or short (a couple of months); might involve R Core members not directly involved with this grant. 
    * Will think about how to distribute responsibility for bug triage amongst mentees.
    * First job for mentees: to think about what they can do in the time they have for the first three months (Mar, Apr, May), e.g. looking at bugs in areas you've taken responsibility for, starting to scope out a project that you're interested in.
    * Currently have R contributors slack, but will move to zulip once that's set up.
        * https://contributor.r-project.org/slack
    * Hoping to prepare translation patch with R6 + Gergely. Use existing system for upcoming release and think about what could be improved in the process next time.
    * Heather + Ella: 
        * setting up zulip and migration people to that. 
        * Thinking about code of conduct
        * Planning upcoming R Dev Days (currently aiming for CascadiaR, because of timezone). 
        * Write report for RSMF to track progress
        * Thinking of having monthly meetings, assuming not everyone will be able to make every meeting, but hopefully once per quarter. Will be used as opportunity to report back to wider group.
5. Discussion (15 min)
    * Heather will add main parts of proposal to the GitHub repo (need to trim full proposal that includes personal and financial information)
    * In addition to quarterly reporting we'll need to write a final report. 
    * We also need to write an outputs management plan, but Heather hopes to deal with this directly. Will need to credit funder in any outputs (papers, presentations, etc)
    * Heather will create channel in R Contributors Slack for team chat
    * Heather will plan out dates for future team meetings
    