# RSMF Whole Team Meeting

Date: Monday 18 May 2026

Present: Peter Dalgaard, Ella Kaye, Heather Turner, Kevin Ushey, Mikael Jagan, Kylie Bemis, Hadley Wickham, Mossa Merhi Reimert, Michael Lawrence. 


Apologies: Gergely Daroczi, Jeroen Ooms

> [!NOTE]  
> This meeting will be recorded and shared with invitees that cannot attend.

## Agenda

1. Project admin update

 * Contracts
   
     - Contract now signed between Birmingham and Edinburgh. HT has requested other contracts now be drafted (has gone quiet, but HT keeps pushing)

     - HT trying to work out finances with R Consortium for the R Project Sprint (confident that can find a way for that to work!)
      
 * Outputs management plan update after last meeting

    - Diff: https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/commit/747b8090f52428ceaa33326e27ba890d275d837d

    - If someone has an activity with potentially high environmental impact, it should be flagged in the agenda for the next RSMF meeting (there will be a section for this at the end, see [section for this month](#activities-with-potentially-high-environmental-cost)). Justify the environmental impact, discuss any alternatives considered and any mitigations that you have made/plan to make to minimise impact.

 * RSMF quarterly report 

    - RSMF quarters are being defined from Feb 2026 - so we are being asked to report on activities in March and April for our first report.
      
     - Deadline 31 May

     - RSMF has provided a template to fill in.

     - Draft:  https://developer.r-project.org/etherpad/p/rsmf-quarterly-report (HT goes through the report as it stands)

     - Mentees will be asked to to provide:

       - Number of bugs brought current (bug doesn't need to be fixed, just progressed in some way).

       - Number of bugs reported
  
       - Number of patches accepted

       - Bullet points of any key activities, deliverables and achievements
  
    - HT will collate these. Numbers will be reported as totals, not broken down by individual.

    - We will also want to report number of new/updated translations patched into R.

    - Mentees can add bullet points for activities to the draft, and also add in numbers at the bottom of the report relating to bug progress, along with links to bugzilla and/or svn revision numbers.

    - Mentees ideally to do this by end of the week (HT will chase next week if not).

    - HT will summarise this approach in an email (may collect via a form or spreadsheet for future reports).

    - Would be good for all mentees to keep track of progress as they go, so it's not too big a job to report on this every quarter.


2. Bug triage

 - Would be good to have more guidance on this. Perhaps Mikael and Gabe could draft some notes on this? Kevin would like to know what would be most useful for R Core, and have written notes on that.

 - Some bugs require a lot of work. What's a reasonable place for a triager to take a bug to?

   - HT: part of the process of triaging is working out if you're the right person to work on the bug (skills, time, etc)
    
 - We have some basic guidance here: https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/issues/20

    - HT will add more notes to the issue to make it more comprehensive, esspecially how to use the new 'TRIAGED' label.

 - Also good to identify bugs that would be good issues for R Dev Days/Sprint. 

    - Currently not a defined way of keeping track of this

    - For now, ping HT on triage channel of R Contributor Slack, but HT will think of a better way!


3. Mentored Cohort updates

 * Michael Chirico

    - Has looked into bug on Wilcoxon test: https://bugs.r-project.org/show_bug.cgi?id=18468

    - No real agreement about the right thing to do, so now clear fix. Might be better to try to improve documentation and perhaps implement a warning.

    - Although no resolution yet, Michael's contributions to discussion are an example of bringing a bug current. 

 * Jeroen Ooms (on holiday)
   
 * Mossa Reimert

    - Has been experimenting with the build system, garbage collector, compiling with linters. Has found a few bugs - not yet reported. Consolidating into one repository and working on disambiguating the changes to be able to propose patches to R.

    - Has made appointment with mentor

 * Mikael Jagan

    - Congratulations on joining R Core!

    - Assigned the accuracy component. Has his eye on two bugs (https://bugs.r-project.org/show_bug.cgi?id=18061, https://bugs.r-project.org/show_bug.cgi?id=18062) - might be resolved as part of refactoring of match(). Needs to discuss with Martin.

 * Kevin Ushey

    - Needs to catch up with Simon

    - Created a proposal for adding R as a target to Google's OSS-Fuzz: https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/issues/53. Will discuss this with Simon

    - Planning to spend more time on bug triaging

    - Work on fuzzing is done for now. All bugs found have been reported, some with patches. A couple of patches were reviewed and merged by Martin Maechler.

 * Gabe Becker (not present, HT will follow up with him afterwards)

 * Kylie Bemis

    - May has been busy (has a move coming up)

    - Will be figuring out bugzilla/triaging in June

    - Wants to catpure/document the mental model/oral history of the R architecture, design choices, that are not documented anywhere (knowledge that currently only resides in R Core members' heads).

    - Interested particularly in memory management, garbage collection.

    - Kylie will reach out to Luke about best way to proceed.

    - This could become a series of blog posts.

    - Long-term motivation: threading in R - needs to understand what the blockers to this might be.

 
4. Translation work (Gergely Daróczi/Fernando Corrêa)

  - No updates since last meeting: patch submitted to Michael Lawrence, waiting for Fernando to start onboarding.

5. Governance/outreach updates

* Collaborations Workshop 26 session: 'Building Stronger Communities: Insights From Multiple Perspectives' in collaboration with Bioconductor and others (session 2.2: https://www.software.ac.uk/news/cw26-mini-workshops-have-now-been-announced) - Ella Kaye/Heather Turner

    * Blog post planned on insights

* R Contributor/R project Zulip (https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/issues/25) - Ella Kaye

    * Meeting later this week with Maria Doyle (Bioconductor) and in a couple of weeks with Josh Triplett (Rust) to discuss their transitions to Zulip

* R Dev Days/R Project Sprint - Heather Turner
  
    * June R Dev Days

      * Rencontres R, Nantes/Remote, June 19: https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-rr2026/

      * CascadiaR, Portland/Remote, June 26: https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-cascadiar-2026

      * Will be prepping issues over next month - please do share any issues that may be good for new contributors on Slack or by email.

    * R Dev Day @ useR!

        * Expecting 34 in person (catering for 40), with 4-5 online

    * R Project Sprint

        * Applications under review, expect 30-35 in person + ~5 online

* Forwards Package Development Workshops: https://forwards.github.io/package-dev/workshops.html

    * 11 in cohort 1, cohort 2 later this week

* Ella Kaye leading CoC team at useR! 2026

6. Other projects

* GSoC multilingual documentation project: https://github.com/rstats-gsoc/gsoc2026/wiki/Multilingual-documentation-of-R-packages. Continuing work started at R Project Sprint 2023. HT co-mentoring. Deepayan Sarkar has met with team and seems keen to stay involved.

7. AOB

## Activities with potentially high environmental cost

* R Dev Day @ useR! 

    - An extra event to the original work plan, but justified as more R Core developers can attend

    - Mitigated by being a satellite event: most participants would attend useR! in any case. Hybrid participation supported for those unable to attend main conference.

* R Project Sprint 2026

    - A key activity of the workplan. Expect ~25 people to fly specially: train/bus travel only viable within UK.

    - Travel support for flights only offered to participants with some track record of contribution (base R, contributor infrastructure, R packages) or sufficient evidence of technical and collaboration skills to be confident they can make a meaningful contribution during the sprint. Hybrid participation supported. Event timed before international Research Software Engineering and statistics conferences in the UK, which some participants are expected to attend.

## Upcoming Dates

* **15 June 20:30 RSMF Whole Team Meeting**
* 28 May 14:30 UTC [R Contribution Working Group](https://contributor.r-project.org/events/)
* 8 June 16:00 UTC [R Repositories Working Group](https://r-consortium.org/news/cal.html)
* 9 June 08:00 UTC [EMEA/APAC R Contributor Office Hour](https://contributor.r-project.org/events/)
* 9 June 16:00 UTC [AMER R Contributor Office Hour](https://contributor.r-project.org/events/)
* 19 June 07:00 - 15:00 UTC / 09:00 - 17:00 CEST [R Dev Day @ Rencontres R](https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-rr2026/)
* 26 June 16:00 - 27 June 00:00 UTC / 26 June 09:00 - 17:00 PDT [R Dev Day @ CascadiaR](https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-dev-day-cascadiar-2026) 

