# RSMF Whole Team Meeting

Date: Monday 20 July 2026

Present: Heather Turner, Gabe Becker, Jeroen Ooms, Mikael Jagan, Kylie Bemis, Mossa Merhi Reimert, Simon Urbanek, Peter Dalgaard 

Apologies: Gergely Darcoczi, Hadley Wickham, Kevin Ushey, Ella Kaye

> [!NOTE]  
> This meeting will be recorded and shared with invitees that cannot attend.

## Agenda

1. Project admin update

 * Contracts

    - Collaboration agreement under review 

        - Comments back from: Copenhagen, Jeroen, NorthEastern

        - Still to hear: Auckland, NumFOCUS, DFCI. Can the corresponding co-leads chase up on their side to make sure they reply to Birmingham, we need to hear from everyone before a second draft can be prepared and shared.
        
    - First draft of project partner letter sent to Google, Posit - working on second draft after initial feedback from Posit 

    - Waiting for other contracts/letters to be prepared

 * RSMF quarterly report (period 1 May - 31 July, deadline Aug 31)

    - Draft from last report:  https://developer.r-project.org/etherpad/p/rsmf-quarterly-report

    - Draft for next time: https://developer.r-project.org/etherpad/p/rsmf-quarterly-report-may-july-2026

    - Time to start reporting back again - can mentees fill in their section on the etherpad to report back on activities and share their plans for next quarter


2. News from RSMF / R Core / Triagers meeting at useR!
   
     - Minutes: https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/blob/main/minutes/2026-07-09.md
       
     - One action was to ask Mike Chirico for bit64 ('integer64' S3 class) use cases

         - Luke trying to get minimal build of R using 64 bit integers amd 8-bit logicals, then will write to R-devel mailing list asking community for use cases

         - Gabe: The main use case I have heard is indexing into large DBs that where you lose integers if you use doubles. Anything above 2^52, if you have a database with more indexes than that, a double will skip in terms of which ones it can exactly represent.

         - Kylie: The main use case I have is storing offsets to larger files - a double might work, but having 64 integers would avoid a lot of casting at C/C++ level

         - Simon: Just having 64 bit integers won't necessarily help with casting, because you need to be able to handle both old and new integers - would need new API that gives as 64-bit version of whatever was given as input. That's why need use cases to think about API

     - Potential projects that came up in discussion:
       
         - Evaluate how useful LLMs might be in evaluating true/false positives from rchk (extra checks for memory issues in packages)
           
             - Mikael may be helping to curate issues in the short term
               
             - Gabe: Another potential project is to update R CMD check to return something more structured than just OK/error
  
                  - Simon: Could be useful for R Journal, to get reports on check that are more structured. LLMs could make this easier, just need to focus on defining API

                  - Jeroen: CRAN has already has a parser to interpret output from check - summarising it as R object. Parsing CMD check output: https://github.com/r-devel/linux-arm64-checks/blob/main/.github/workflows/check.yml#L59-L60

                  - Simon: Could keep track of everything in an environment, then at the same time output in the old style
              
                  - Jeroen: R CMD check just spits stuff out once it's done so it's going to be hard to buffer everything. A structured output may make more sense in retrospect, but what we have have now works well.
          
                  - Simon: Need to think more about what use case for structure output could be.
          
                  - Gabe: Maybe useful for GUIs/downstream tools, comparing things, categorising notes (e.g. documentation errors), hierarchical groupings

                  - Example of revdep-check wrapper which parses output into structured objects: https://github.com/r-devel/recheck/blob/v1/rechecktools/R/recheck.R#L12-L57
              
                  - Something to discuss with Kurt to see if it would be helpful, easier to maintain, etc.
                    
         - Use AI to review mailing list data from a few weeks after R releases to find patterns of things that broke, to guide community testing before release
           
     - Discussed triaging guidelines (highlights noted in next item)

2. Bug triage

- Bug triage. Issues highlighted from last time
  
    - Gabe: https://bugs.r-project.org/show_bug.cgi?id=18930 - CLOSED FIXED
      
    - Kevin: Luke promised to look at these after returning from useR!, alongside some other issues Heather shared.

        - https://bugs.r-project.org/show_bug.cgi?id=19061 

        - https://bugs.r-project.org/show_bug.cgi?id=19062

        - https://bugs.r-project.org/show_bug.cgi?id=19063

- From RSMF / R Core / Triagers meeting at useR!

    - Decided to share monthly summary of bugs that have been triaged with R Core, rather than pinging individuals

        - HT to discuss with SU what should output be. Query to extract what we want through Bugzilla, or extract from the database.

    - MJ will draft update to https://www.r-project.org/bugs.html to discourage AI-only bug reports
      
    - Asked to note in comment when moving a bug to TRIAGED, so R Core don't need to check in history who did this.

3. Mentored Cohort updates

 * Michael Chirico - not present
   
 * Gabe Becker
   
     - Testing patch that will allow install.packages to create just in time repository to install depenencies. Positive response from Uwe Ligges.
       
 * Mikael Jagan
   
     - Will carry forward rchk configuration/deployment. Will follow up with Kurt and others that worked on refactoring of rchk.
       
 * Jeroen Ooms

      - Trying to get ARM for Windows checks to work on r-universe. Will see if CRAN interested in publishing those results once have those working for most CRAN packages.
        
      - Investigating updating Rtools to use the native compiler from MSYS2.
        
 * Kevin Ushey - not present
 
 * Mossa Reimert

     - Experimented with using Makevars for base R packages as we do for contributed packages, but doesn't really work.

     - Looking at Arrow compatibility with R. Individual CHARSXPs cannot exceed 2 GiB because the string length in the API is stored as a signed 32-bit integer. This may affect applications that need very large strings (e.g. some geospatial use cases that store JSON as strings).
    
     - Need to tidy up bugs/patches that might be accepted from experimentation.

     - Also been triaging low-level bugs. Many with patch from Kevin: confirmed that these cleanly pass the test suite. Need to report back on Bugzilla.

 * Kylie Bemis

     - Main activity was at CascadiaR. Starting to triage bugs on Bugzilla.

     - Wants to get back to researching R design decisions, preparing questions for conversation with Luke and others about this (probably async over email). Plans to write up in blog posts.

 
4. Translation work (Gergely Daróczi/Fernando Corrêa)

* Work at R Dev Day @ useR!

    - Gergely updated the version of Weblate on our instance. This will enable use the file location of strings from the .pot file and strip them from the .po files (less churn in version control). Heather working on update to R function to add file lication fro strings in R files.

    - Gergely also had conversations with R Core on changes that could be made to make it easier to maintain community translations, which is the main focus under RSMF.

5. Governance/outreach updates

* R Contributor/R project Zulip (https://github.com/r-devel/rsmf/issues/25) - didn't discuss as Ella not present

* R Dev Days - Heather: Not yet prepared reports, but good attendance at recent dev days listed below. Most of us present attended at least one, so know there were a lot of useful contributions made. Hybrid format difficult to manage, but has been helpful to have input from online R Core members (especially Kurt Hornik) and have had a few contributors engage productively online, so nice to be able to offer the option.
    * Rencontres R, Nantes/Remote, June 19: 
    * CascadiaR, Portland/Remote, June 26: 
    * useR!, Warsaw/Remote, July 10
      
* R Project Sprint - Heather

    * Please register: GB, HT, KB, MR, SU (https://pretix.eu/r-contributors/r-project-sprint-2026/)
 
    * Logistics

      * Has been a long delay in getting money transfered to the travel fund (https://crowdfunding.linuxfoundation.org/initiatives/r-contributor-support) but promised to be transferred by end of day today, so hopefully can start processing travel bursaries soon.
     
      * Currently facing issue processing payment for accommodation due to different working practices of finance teams at Birmingham and the Linux Foundation. Discussed how to address this, hope to resolve soon.

* Next year (did not discuss)
 
    * R Dev Day  at useR! 2027 in Chile possibly July 19
    * Async sprint to test R before release - end Feb/beg Mar

## Activities with potentially high environmental cost

Nothing new to report.

## Upcoming Dates

* **17 August 20:30 RSMF Whole Team Meeting**

* 3 August 15:00 UTC [R Repositories Working Group](https://r-consortium.org/news/cal.html)
* 11 August 08:00 UTC [EMEA/APAC R Contributor Office Hour](https://contributor.r-project.org/events/)
* 11 August 16:00 UTC [AMER R Contributor Office Hour](https://contributor.r-project.org/events/)
* 25 August 19:30 UTC [R Contribution Working Group](https://contributor.r-project.org/events/)

